In this video, we'll learn about a
really great feature that was added
in c++11, the range-based for loop.
This loop really makes c++ feel
like a modern programming language.
The idea with the range based for loop
is to loop through a collection of
elements and be able to easily access
each element without having to worry
about the length of the collection or
incrementing or decrementing looping
variables or subscripting indexes.
The syntax is very simple and elegant.
We have the keyword for followed by
open and closed parentheses as usual.
Inside the parentheses, we provide
the type and name for the variable
we want to use in the loop body.
This variable will be bound to
each element of the collection.
So it should be of the same
type as the collection elements.
Then we provide a colon and the
collection or collection name.
That's it.
Now when we access the variable name
in the body of the loop, it will have
a specific element in the collection.
Pretty cool.
Let's see an example.
In this example, our collection is an
array of integers named scores, that
we've initialized to 100, 90 and 97.
And here's the code that
iterates over that collection
using the range-based for loop.
Notice that in the
parentheses, we provide the
type of each array element.
In this case, it's an integer.
And we provide the variable name
that we can use in the body of
the loop, in this case, score.
Finally, we provide a
colon and the name of the
collection which is scores.
That's it.
Now we can use score in
the body of the loop.
The loop displays 100, 90 and 97,
which are the elements in the array.
See how much cleaner and
less error prone this is.
It was a great addition to c++.
We actually don't have to explicitly
provide the type of the variable.
Instead, we can use
the auto keyword this.
Tells the c++ compiler to
deduce the type itself.
In other words, you're asking the
c++ compiler to figure out the
type based on the declarations.
So in this case, the compiler
sees that you're using a
collection scores in the loop.
So it looks it scores and it sees that
it's an array of integers, so it uses
an integer for the score variable.
Pretty easy.
Actually, in this case, using
auto versus int doesn't really,
buy us much but c++ can have
very complex collections.
And sometimes defining the type of a
collection variable can be quite long
and tricky, auto makes it dead simple.
In this example, we want to
calculate the average temperature
from a vector that contains doubles
that represent temperatures.
The vector in this case is called
temps, and it contains 4 doubles.
In order to calculate the average
temperature in this vector, we
need to iterate over the vector,
access each temperature, add
them all up and divide by 4.
That's it.
Notice the for loop
and how simple it is.
It's saying loop through the temps
collection and each time through
assign a temperature from the vector
to the loop variable temp, which
the compiler deduces to be a double.
We add this to our running sum then
when the loop is done we perform a
simple division to get the average.
Notice that I'm using the vector's
size method which returns the
number of elements in the vector.
In this case, it will return 4.
The range-based for loop can also use
an initializer list as a collection.
Let's see that one.
This example also calculates
the average before temperatures.
Notice how we can explicitly provide
the collection right in the for loop.
This is sometimes handy when you
know the elements of your collection
ahead of time, and they won't change.
The only downside is that you have
to calculate the size as you go.
In this last example, we can
use the range-based for loop
to iterate over a string which
is a collection of characters.
In this case the string is the literal
franc, but it could be a variable.
We're going to discuss strings in
the next section of the course.
Well, that pretty much covers the
basics of the range-based for loop.
Let's head over to the
IDE and see some examples.
I'm in the CodeLite IDE in
the section 9 workspace in the
range-based for loop project.
What I'd like to do in this
example is go over a couple of
examples of using the range-based
for loop with an array, with
a vector and with a string.
So the first thing we'll do
is just use a simple array.
And you'll notice that I've already
included vector right up here since
I'm going to use vector in a minute.
So let's create an array of
integers, and we'll call it scores.
And we'll initialize it,
let's just say 10, 20 and 30.
Okay, so what we want to do
now is we want to iterate
through that collection.
It's an array in this case,
using the range-based for loop.
It's as simple as can be.
We can say for int because we
know we've got integers here.
And what do we want to call each
int, we'll call it score because
that's what it is a single score.
Then we have the colon and
then we provide the name of the
collection, in this case, scores.
So that's the loop header.
And then all we really
need to do here is just say
cout and display the score.
That's it.Let's run this.
And that's exactly what
we get 10, 20 and 30.
Now as I mentioned in the slides, we
don't have to provide that in there.
We can simply use the auto keyword.
And what's going to happen here.
I mean it's pretty straightforward,
but it's important that you
understand what's going on.
You're telling the compiler
to figure out the type.
So the compiler is going to come in
here and say, okay, what's going on.
The collection is scores, okay.
Scores is an array of integers.
So this must be an int.
So it's going to deduce that
type right here to be an int.
Same as we did before.
As I mentioned, this is not
a big deal, it's easy to type
in, it's easy to type auto.
But collections in c++, especially
generic collections and templates
get really crazy syntax.
And sometimes it's very difficult
to exactly the type that you want.
And this just makes it so easy.
You just type auto and the compiler
will figure it out, which is great.
That's what we're doing here.
We just printed out the
scores really, really easy.
Let me run this.
Using the auto keyword now, you can
see the behavior is exactly the same.
All right, perfect.
Let me comment that out, and
let's do another example.
In this case, we'll create a vector.
So let's create a vector of doubles.
And we'll just call it temperatures.
And we'll initialize these to
let's say 87.9, 77.9 could be
really any numbers you like
and 80.0 and how about 72.5.
So those are the 4 temperatures
that I'm interested in.
Maybe their temperatures per week,
per year, per month, it doesn't
really matter, it all depends
on what you're trying to do.
Now what we want to do is we
want to calculate the average of
the mean of those temperatures.
All right, so we're going
to need the average itself.
So we'll just call it average
temp, and it's a double.
We'll initialize that to 0.
And we also need a double that's
going to be the running total
because we need to sum them
all up and then divide them by
whatever size that vector is.
In this case, it happens to be 4
but it could be any size we want.
So there's my double.
I'll call it total, and
I'll initialize that to 0.
All right, so now let's
loop through that vector.
So we'll say for auto.
Let's create the variable
temp, that'll be one of those
temperatures one at each iteration.
And the name of the collection
is temperatures, right.
What do we do, we say total
plus equals temp,
and I'll scroll up just a little bit give
myself a little bit of room.
That's it.
Now we divide by the size
of that temperatures vector.
But before we do that, always
make sure that that size is
not equal to 0 because we don't
want to divide by 0 error.
So we'll just say something like
if temperatures.size, that's
the method for the vector, if
that's equal to 0, then we don't
want to do the division, right.
So what do we want to do we want
to make sure it's not equal to 0.
If it's not equal to 0, it's
safe to divide and what I'll say
is as simple as average temp is
equal to the total divided by the
temperatures.size again, number
of elements in that vector.
That's it. Notice we don't have to do any
casting here because total --
this is an unsigned integer right here
it's going to return the size
which is an unsight integer but
total we defined as a double so
it's going to do double division.
All right, so that's
it we'll output now.
We'll say something like average
temperature is average temp.
We'll put an endline at the
end, and let's run this.
There's the average
temperature, 79.575.
Now let me show you one of the
io manipulators that you can use.
And as I said, I'll cover
these later on in the course.
There's a whole bunch of them.
They're not all that important,
but they'll they're important
to help us format our output.
What we can do is we can say -- first
thing, we need to do is we need to
go up top here and include io manip.
That's the io manipulation operators.
And what we'll do here is right before
we output, we can say cout, fixed and
then set precision to let's say 1.
That's 1 number after the
decimal point, and it will round.
So in this case, let's run that and
now you'll see this formatted as 79.6.
I think before, it was 79.575 or
something like that I don't recall.
But it's going to round it up to 79.6.
It's always going to have one digit
to the right of the decimal point.
If this is what you need,
this is an easy way to do it.
Otherwise 79.575 works for me.
All right, so that'll
take care of this example.
Let me show you a
couple more examples.
And again I'll comment these out
so they don't keep executing.
Let's put in an initializer
list right into the loop.
This is not something
you see very often.
But I wanted to show you in case you
do see it, you know what's going on.
In this case, we'll say 4 again
auto and the value it will be val.
Then right in here, we can
put the initializer list.
So we can say 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Sometimes you see this when you know
that these numbers are ahead of time.
And in this case, we could just say
cout val and we can do endline here.
So what's going to happen
is it's going to iterate
through that collection.
Remember, this is a
collection and it's going
to display 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.
And let's run that real quick.
And there you can see
the 1 2 3 4 and 5.
Now the last example i want
to show you is with a string.
Now there's two kinds
of strings in c++.
There is a c style string, and
there's a c++ style string.
I'm going to cover these
in the next section.
What we're going to use here
is just a c style string.
That's what we've
been using all along.
That's a bunch of characters
inside double quotes.
So what I want to do is I'm just
going to say for again auto, in
this case, it's going to be a
character type, I'll call it c.
And my collection is basically
a bunch of characters, right,
a sequence of characters.
So this is a test.
That's it.
What can I do in here.
Well, I can output the character.
And I'm not going to put a new
line because I don't want a new
line at the end of every character,
that'll print them up and down.
In this case, it should just print
that string right back out at me.
And there you see right
up here, this is a test.
So it's printing it
out directly out at me.
Suppose I wanted to skip the spaces.
How would I do that?
Well, I would just
filter the spaces out.
I would say if the character
I'm looking at c in this case,
right, is not equal to a space,
then print the character.
So what's going to happen here.
Again, each iteration I'm
looking at that character.
If it's not a space, I print it.
If it is a space, I'm
not doing anything.
So I'm basically just getting rid of
all the spaces inside that string.
So when I display that, you should
see -- you see that right there, this
is the test all bunched up together.
Okay, now suppose I wanted to
replace the -- and again, we're
not changing the string here,
we're just printing out the
string, one character at a time.
Suppose what I wanted to do was
every time there's a space I want
to replace it with a tab character,
I want to display the tab.
So I'm going to spread these
characters out a little bit.
Well, we can change the
logic here a little bit.
And again, let me comment this out so
it's available for you to play with.
And I'll do something like that just.
So I can just modify a little bit
of code and get this to run, right.
Okay, so we're here
in the same position.
I'm going to comment this out.
And so I'm reading the string
again, I've got each character in c.
And I'm going to say if c
is the space, then I don't
want to print out the space.
What I want to do is, I
want to print out a tab.
And if you remember the tab is a /t.
Otherwise, I just want to print out
the character, right, anything except
the space, something like that.
So let's try that out.
And there you go.
It says this then you see
a tab is then a tab a and a
tab and test and so forth.
We can play all kinds of games.
You can replace one
character with another.
You can create your own little
cipher if you want that you can
send across to a friend and they
can decipher it on the other side.
Anyway, that's pretty much
the range-based for loop.
There's a couple of examples I've
shown you here that hopefully
make it really, really easy.
I mean this is so much simpler.
Notice again, there's no int i.
There's no ++I.
We're not counting.
We're simply looping through a
collection, and we don't even have to
worry about the type with the auto.
So it makes it really easy to think
but a very high level to solve your
problems without getting bogged
down with all the little details.
Okay, so, that's the
end of this video.